

             ***** [lightlang.png] *****
===============================================================================
***** Requirements and configuration *****
===============================================================================
**** Installing LightLang ****
   Qt4 graphical library, its Python layer - PyQt4, which is in need of SIP (do
not confuse with IP telephony). All these packages can be found in your
distributive's repositories, so installing these packages can be brought to
typing commands, containing a few words. But if you won't find the libraries,
then you'll have to install them yourself. At that moment SIP and Qt4 are rare,
but they can be always found in the repositories of modern distributives.
PyQt4, the necessary component for LightLang, is often missing. So you can
download Qt4, SIP and PyQt4 using the following links:
    * http://trolltech.com/developer/downloads/qt/x11
    * http://www.riverbankcomputing.co.uk/sip/download.php
    * http://www.riverbankcomputing.co.uk/pyqt/download.php
   Libraries should be compiled and installed in the order they are shown here.
Installing is not described here, for it doesn't differ from the usual one.
   Remember that it would be best to find them as prepared packages for your
distributive.
   Required versions:
    * Qt4 >= 4.2.2
    * SIP >= 4.6
    * PyQt4 >= 4.2.2
   After the installation of libraries is finished, you can start installing
LightLang.
   There are several configure options available, which can be sent by using
configure script:
    * --prefix=prefix_dir - specifies the install directory prefix, by default
      - /usr
    * ;
--with-default-config=normal|liksys|kde|console - used to select a
configuration preset. These presets were made and named by developers to be
suitable for your system. Default preset is normal, because this configuration
is suitable for the majority of users, but you can also use other options, for
example liksys - this configuration is used by the main developer;
--with-audio-player=player_prog - specifies the audio player, which is used for
playing voice transcriptions of the words. Player is required to be able to be
run in console suing look alike command:
      player filename
   it is also required to be able to run OGG, for LightLang stores its voice
transcription files in that format (what differs it from other dictionaries,
for they use lossless WAV). For example, you can specify MPlayer as a player: -
-with-audio-player=mplayer. A the same time, path to executable player file
must be located in your PATH variable. Default player is play;
--with-gui-terminal=terminal_prog - used fro specifying the graphical terminal.
Default is XTerm, but KDE fans can specify Konsole for example;
--with-gui-flag=no - used for choosing whether the graphical interface will be
installed or not (and calculate dependencies for it). Default is yes. Disabling
installation of the graphical interface is generally used on machines that do
not support graphical systems or when user wants to install another graphical
interface for SL.
   You can download the dictionaries from our repositories during the install
using download.py script, which must be executed between configure and make. If
you want to see the list of dictionaries and sounds that we have in our
repositories, execute from LightLang directory the following commands:
      ./download.py remotelist dicts
      ./download.py remotelist sounds
   After that you can add, for example, a dictionary to LightLang sources tree
using this command:
      ./download.py install dicts Mueller-24.en-ru
   It will be automatically unpacked and added to the sources catalog and then,
during the build phase, it will be compiled. To browse available options for
working with repositories type:
      ./download.py help
   Usually, LightLang is installed as it is shown below (we'll also download en
sounds and Mueller-24.en-ru dictionary):
      [liksys@max ~]$ tar -xjvf lightlang-0.8.5.tar.bz2
      [liksys@max ~]$ cd lightlang-0.8.5
      [liksys@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ ./configure
      [liksys@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ ./download.py install dicts Mueller-24.en-
ru
      [liksys@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ ./download.py install sounds en
      [liksys@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ make
      [liksys@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ su
      Password: enter root password
      [root@max lightlang-0.8.5]$ make install


**** Possible problems: Fedora 7 ****
   While installing PyQt4 you can get an error. I've solved this problem, but I
don't remember how :-) Trying to remember. But this problem can be solved.


**** Possible problems: Mandriva 2007 ****
   Mandriva (2007.0 and 1) users will have to download the specified libraries
from Cooker and install them from the sources. Also, Python-KDE, Python-Qt3 and
QScintilla problems may appear. All this should be installed. Or just wait for
2008.0.


**** Possible Problems: (K)Ubuntu ****
   A problem may appear at the configuration phase:
      checking for gcc... gcc
      checking for C compiler default output file name...
      configure: error: C compiler cannot create executables
      See `config.log' for more details.
   In that case you should install libstdc++-<version>-dev including its
dependencies.

   Another problem may appear at the configuration phase:
      checking for play... error: play is not found
   This problem can be solved by installing SOX or SND package, or you can
simply specify another audio-player.

   And one more problem may appear at the configuration phase:
      Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/usr/bin/xsl", line 24, in <module>
      import Main
      File "/usr/lib/xsl/pyqt4/Main.py", line 6, in <module>
      from PyQt4 import Qt
      File "/usr/lib/python2.5/site-packages/PyQt4/Qt.py", line 4, in <module>
      from PyQt4.QtOpenGL import *
      ImportError: No module named QtOpenGL
   This problem can be solved by installing python-qt4-gl and python-qt4-sql
including their dependencies.


   Remember, that if some component won't be found during the configuration,
the problem will display an error and tell you where you can get it.
===============================================================================
